---
author: Mark Torrey
date: 'November 2, 2014'
rights: 'Â© 2014 Mark Torrey, CC BY-NC-SA'
subtitle: |
    A comprehensive history of 20th-Century pop music in the form of a
    mixtape.
title: Music For Emma
---

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*This is a mix I made for my 15 year old sister Emma. At some point in
her life Emma will be at a party full of cool smart people, and someone
will ask her to pick some music to play. I would hope (as my sister) she
would have the confidence to choose music in such a way that it jams the
party right into the appropriate gear. The songs selected here are not
obscure hidden gems, or challenging boundary pushers (not that there's
anything wrong with boundary pushing), just some of my favorite tracks
from some of the most important people in the history of pop music. But
since I don't think it is fair to just dump music on someone and expect
them to try to figure out why it is good, I wrote some brief
descriptions to help fill in the story for her. This whole project is,
by necessity, an exercise in hyperbole. Sorry about that.*

Blind Willie Johnson
--------------------

In the beginning, before the Beatles, before Bob Dylan, and before
Crosby Stills Nash and Young, there was a crazy artist living in New
York City named Harry Smith. He collected records of old-timey mountain
folks from the south, singing songs passed down from one family member
to another for generations. You saw *Oh Brother, Where art thou?* right?
--- that's what the songs were like. In the 1950s Harry made the most
famous music mix of all time. He put all his favorite songs out on six
records called *The Anthology of American Folk Music*. All the cool
people in NYC and London listened to those records. They listened to the
Anthology until they wore out the needles of their record players. They
couldn't get enough. Those records had jug bands, and blues songs;
murder ballads, and dudes who slid their knife up and down the guitar
strings to make crazy sounds. Nobody had ever heard anything like it
before. (At least not coming out of a record player.) And then the cool
people started writing their own songs, imitating the styles they heard
on the Anthology records. By then it was the 1960s and the cool people
were forming their own bands. They wanted their bands to sound kind of
like what they heard on the Anthology, and this became what you know as
"folk" music. Now, every song on the Anthology is a piece of musical
history, and the Anthology songs influenced all sorts of people
(including Bob Dylan who, as you know, is kind of a big deal.) But Blind
Willie is the hole in the middle of the Anthology around which the
record of musical history spun. In a whole collection of songs sounding
like nothing else before, his song: **John the Revelator**, demanded the
particular attention of the cool people. It sounded like it had come
from some place deep in America's past, and at the same time it had a
message for all of humanity's future. And all the cool people felt bad
because the guy who had written this song they loved so much had lived
and died in a racist system, which meant none of them had even gotten to
shake the fellow's hand. He was kind of a mysterious figure. Not much is
known about him except he was blind because his mom threw a pan of lye
(a cleaning chemical) in his face when he was a kid --- hence the name.
A lot of the songs on the Anthology were about nasty things, things just
as nasty as getting lye thrown in your face, but Blind Willie Johnson
was deeply religious. His songs were mostly about God. It sometimes
seemed like he stood with one foot planted on Earth and the other on
some higher plane. Maybe he was a prophet. But even if he was just a
poor, blind, devout dude with a gravelly voice, he recorded some of the
most important songs in the history of humanity. One of his songs is
actually on board the Voyager spacecraft --- which became the first
spacecraft to leave the solar system a couple of years ago. (And, also,
is the evil alien force in Star Trek, The Motion Picture.)

James Brown
-----------

Have you listened to any James Brown yet? If you haven't, it's time to
start. His backing band was made up of some of the greatest musicians
who ever lived. Nobody could play like those guys. And the music they
made, sometimes called soul, sometimes called funk, set the basis for
dance music for the next 50 years. (Dance music --- you know, music you
dance to, as opposed to the kind you sit around and sing along with ---
is a pretty important part of music.) He started putting these songs out
in the 1960s, and when people heard those songs, they just *had* to
start dancing. They couldn't help it. The lyrics could be ridiculous
sometimes, but the music was an unstoppable dance force. Before James
Brown, dancing was kinda boring (there were a lot of rules for how to do
it right). After him, it was fun. Turns out people like fun dancing a
lot more than boring dancing. This song, **Mother Popcorn** is about
popcorn. And mothers, apparently.

Leonard Cohen
-------------

Lots of people (ELA teachers mostly) complain that most people don't
like poetry anymore. But this isn't true at all. What actually happened
is the greatest poets of the 20th century happened to prefer writing
rock songs to writing "poetry." And nobody *ever* complains that not
enough people like rock songs, right? Leonard Cohen is a Canadian dude
who is one of the greatest song writers of all time. (A lot of people
think he is one of the greatest poets of all time too.) He started
writing songs in the 1960s. He was probably one of the cool people
listening to the Anthology of American Folk Music like everyone else. He
wrote that song *Suzanne* ("\...brings you tea and oranges, that come
all the way from China..." --- you know the one.) And he also wrote a
famous song called *Hallelujah* which you would recognize if you heard
it. He wrote dozens of songs in which the way he constructs his lyrics
will give you chills, if you give them a chance. Your Uncle Kevin says,
"The man has class, heart, and cool." This song, **Famous Blue
Raincoat**, is one of his best. One of the best songs ever written
should be about a raincoat, don't you think?

Serge Gainsbourg
----------------

Serge Gainsbourg was a French man you never heard of. He was an ugly
little troll who all the most beautiful women in the world were in love
with because he wrote amazing songs. He too was a poet writing rock
music. But his songs were in French, so most Americans have never heard
his stuff. The music is complex, but still catchy. Like James Brown, he
would hire the best musicians to play for him. And if you listen to
enough, somehow you can just tell the lyrics are deeply poetic and
tricky, even though you don't understand them in French. **The Ballad of
Melody Nelson** is one song from a whole album about a girl riding a
bicycle who he hits with his Rolls Royce --- and then falls in love
with. It is considered one of the greatest albums ever recorded (in
French).

Dolly Parton
------------

Dolly Parton is one of the few people included in this list who is both
a world-class singer and a world-class songwriter at the same time. Her
singing is shocking---just listen to it---she has access to vocal
registers that "cut you to the quick" as your old humbug wizard would
say. Her voice just tears right through your sad little heart. But the
thing that makes Dolly special is she pairs her voice with the
exceptionally good songs she writes. Leonard Cohen probably writes
better lyrics than Dolly Parton (well he pretty much writes better
lyrics than *everybody*) but he can't back his lyrics up with a voice
like Dolly Parton's. And when she puts those two things together it
becomes something that makes you feel like it might spoil your
reasonable sense of what other good music might sound like. Dolly makes
country music of course. And the best country songs are either really
funny, or terribly sad, like this one: **I Will Always Love You**. She
has funny ones too.

Johnny Cash
-----------

Johnny Cash you know, because you saw that movie. But you should listen
to a lot *more* Johnny Cash. He did not write many of his own songs, and
is not one of the great song writers like other folks I've been talking
about. Mostly he took other people's great songs and through some kind
of magic I can't figure out, he made them matter a lot more. Sometimes
even when the original song was *terrible*. My guess is his trick was
using his stripped-down style to make other people's ridiculous and
overly fancy songs, simple and sad (...or funny!) It didn't hurt that he
had the mega-rock-star status thing going for him. This song, **A Boy
Named Sue** was written by Shel Silverstein. (You remember that book
*Where the Sidewalk Ends*?---same guy.) He played it for the first time
in San Quentin prison. That part is in the movie. The second most
important dude in the history of country music is Merle Haggard. He was
*at* the show Johnny Cash played in San Quentin---because he was in
prison there.

Nancy Sinatra
-------------

Nancy Sinatra is the daughter of Frank Sinatra. (You know who he was,
right?) Most people think she sings pretty well. (Though she's no Dolly
Parton.) She sang more than one James Bond theme song. And she sang that
song *These Boots Are Made For Walking*. I'm sure you've heard it. But
like Johnny Cash, she didn't write most of her songs. (For a lot of
performers back then, and even today, it's pretty normal to have someone
else write your songs.) She had a friend named Lee Hazlewood who wrote
all of her most famous songs. And he *was* one of the great song
writers. But he wasn't a terrific singer, so he usually got Nancy to
sing for him (smart, huh?). More people know *These Boots Are Made For
Walking*, but this song, **Sand**, is one of the best that Lee and Nancy
ever did together.

Kraftwerk
---------

Kraftwerk are a couple of German guys who also happen to be the most
influential band in the history of music. You've heard of the Beatles
right? Kraftwerk is more influential than they are. Then why have you
never heard of Kraftwerk? Because mostly it was other musicians who
listened to them. A *lot* of other musicians. People who worked in a far
wider range of musical styles than the Beatles. The special thing
Kraftwerk did was they made pop music with electronic instruments.
Mostly keyboards. That sounds boring now, but nobody did it before them.
And *everyone* did it after them because they thought Kraftwerk were so
cool. Any band you have ever heard with a keyboard in it, or a drum
machine, or uses clips from other music, probably was listening to
Kraftwerk at some point. This includes *all* the pop music from the
1980s, and *all* the dance music from the 1970s and 1980s. (Like, say,
disco---maybe you've heard of that?) Remember, dance music is an
enormous part of the history of music. Even *all* of the early rap and
hip hop musicians were listening to Kraftwerk! For some reason the guys
in the Bronx who started rapping in the 1980s (creating a whole new
genre of music) thought this obscure band from Germany was awesome. But
Kraftwerk wasn't just using new instruments to break new ground in
musical history. Their songs were also amazing little puzzles which are
always about two things at once. The songs have simple melodies, with
simple lyrics, and simple singing. But if you pay close attention you'll
realize the songs are special little things you can listen to over and
over again, and hear a new meaning in the lyrics every time. Like any
great music. This song, **Radioactivity** is both about radioactivity
and about radios. With activity on them.

Parliament
----------

Parliament (or P-funk) played a lot of their best stuff in the 1970s and
they kind of picked up where James Brown left off. Like James Brown,
they crammed as many people on stage as they could. And all of the
people on stage were world-class musicians. They wrote crazy songs about
aliens coming down from outer space to make you dance. Parliament's
music was considered funk because they weren't using too many electronic
instruments. (After them, when dance groups switched to using lots of
electronic instruments, people started calling it disco.) They had a
real drummer and real instruments and funky beats. But their style was
kind of like the crazy electronic dance music that was right around the
corner. (Made by all those people listening to Kraftwerk, who thought
computer music and keyboards were cool.) The song here is
**Flashlight**, which has the chorus, "everybody has a little light
under the sun." What do you think that means?

Brian Eno
---------

Also in the 1970s (you had no idea the 1970s were so important to music,
did you?) there was this guy Brian Eno. Brian Eno knew every musician in
NYC and London. And they all wanted him to "produce" their albums. (That
just means deciding which instruments to use on a song and how loud each
instrument should be---turns out, this is important for making a song
sound good.) Eno was some kind of genius producer, as if God had reached
down and tapped him on the head and said, "thou shalt produce!" He
claimed not to know anything about music, but every album he touched
magically turned into a classic of pop music. He produced records for
Roxy Music, The Velvet Underground, U2, Talking Heads, Genesis, David
Bowie, Devo, and piles of others. But, and this is a big but, he also
wrote songs himself which have astonishing twisting lyrics that
sometimes tell creepy stories, and sometimes make you fall in love. And
his songs sound like nothing else before or since. If you are talking
about pop music, he is one of the most talented people to ever adjust
the sound levels on a recording. And this song, **I'll Come Running**,
is one of the best he ever wrote himself.

Donna Summer
------------

Donna Summer is famous for her disco songs. And what amazing disco songs
they are! The lyrics aren't much, but her voice just soars. Her secret
weapon though was a guy named Giorgio Moroder. He was another producer
with a gift for turning other people's songs into pop hits. Not just
ordinary pop hits---if you listen closely, the sounds he creates are
complicated and have lots of smaller sounds mushed together to create
them. He used more electronics and computers than Brian Eno. His stuff
sounded more like Kraftwerk. Many of the best songs of the disco era had
Giorgio Moroder standing behind them, listening to headphones, and
twiddling knobs until they sounded just perfect. He turned this song,
**I Feel Love**, by Donna Summer into a work of art. When Brian Eno
heard it, he said, "I have heard the sound of the future." At least,
that's what David Bowie says he said. One way or another, this song
turned dance music from funk (with real instruments) into disco (with
electronic instruments.)

Patti Smith
-----------

At the same time that Donna Summer was changing pop music, Patti Smith
was changing punk rock. Before her, punk rock was just a just bunch of
dudes getting drunk and breaking things and yelling "anarchy!" (Not that
there's anything wrong with that.) Patti Smith brought art and poetry
and angry women to punk rock. Her songs are intense and full of imagery
(like images of, say, horses.) And her band does the awesome thing where
they start off soft and build up until you have to put your fingers in
your ears and if you squint you can almost see raw energy pouring off
the stage. Lots of the best bands do this kind of thing. She is another
person who knew every famous person who passed through NYC in the 1970s.
Bruce Springsteen thought she was so cool he gave her one of his best
songs! (*Because The Night*.) This song, **Land**, is the centerpiece of
her album *Horses*---one of the most important albums in the history of
music.

Talking Heads
-------------

Ok. Yet another guy living in NYC in the 1970s and 80s, named David
Byrne, had a band called *Talking Heads*. They wrote fun pop songs which
sounded good in the car when you were driving home from work. But the
lyrics were about serial killers, and arson, and the end of the world.
Like Parliament and James Brown, David Byrne had the good sense to pack
the stage with unbelievable musicians and (you may remember) have Brian
Eno produce his albums. He topped it off by having awesome designers and
artists do his album covers. Every cool person in the world likes
Talking Heads. No joke. Go ahead and ask anyone cool you meet. If you
are ever at a party full of cool people and someone asks you to put some
music on, just throw on some Talking Heads. Everyone will think you have
good taste in music, but all you did was pick the one band every cool
person likes. This song, **Nothing But Flowers**, is about eating
chocolate chip cookies after the apocalypse. It's my favorite. One of
the backup singers on this song is Kirsty MacColl. She was part of the
Pogues too, as you'll see.

Tom Waits
---------

Tom Waits sings with a gravelly low voice which is supposed to make you
think he drank too much whiskey and smoked too many cigarettes. Maybe he
did, maybe he didn't, but that's the shtick. Why does he want you to
think that? Because you're supposed to believe his main job is singing
for tips in a crappy bar. But don't be fooled, this guy is one of the
finest musicians there is. And he packs his albums and shows full of
world-class backup musicians. And then on top of the music he lays down
tricky, funny, touching, lyrics full of plays on words which make you
giggle. (They're "punny"!) All that, and all you have to do is learn to
like a little bit of a gravelly voice. Really, his voice isn't even as
bad as Bob Dylan's, and you know how much people will put up with to
listen to *that* guy's songs. This song, **Strange Weather**, is one of
the best songs nobody you know has ever heard. It's about talking about
the weather. And not buying umbrellas.

The Pogues
----------

The Pogues were an Irish rock band. They had this awesome idea that if
you combined traditional Irish music (you know jigs, reels, and whatnot)
with punk and rock music, you could make a really *really* popular band.
They were right. They were so right that nowadays there are about 1000
bands which sound just like the Pogues. But the Pogues were there first,
and they are a way better band than all the rest. Why? Because there's
like nine dudes in the Pogues and every one of them is among the best in
the world at playing his instrument. (Yet another band using that
technique! Funny how well it works.) But lots of the other Irish rock
bands have good musicians. The Pogues also had Shane MacGowan writing
songs for them. Songs just poured out of Shane MacGowan. It seemed like
he didn't even have to try. He just threw words out there and they would
somehow fit the jig, and the reel, and the rock, in a way that gave you
shivers. The only problem was he was so drunk all the time you couldn't
understand a damn word he said. The band eventually kicked him out for
being drunk. But then they had to let him back in, because without him
they were just like all the other bands that sound like the Pogues.
People like well-played music, but they *love* a catchy lyric and a good
turn of phrase. This song, **Fairytale of NY**, is a duet with Kirsty
MacColl (who sang with Talking Heads, remember?) Her voice is shocking.
Particularly on the lines, "you could have been someone---well so could
anyone!" (The producer did a trick on that part---the vocals are doubled
up so they sound like more than one person singing.) She died young,
saving her son from being run over by a motorboat. Which makes that
song, and that part of the song particularly, kind of sad. But kind of
sad in a good way. In Europe this song has actually become a Christmas
classic, and people play it a lot during the holidays (probably an
annoying amount.) Nick Cave says the first line is the greatest first
line ever written. That's a pretty impressive endorsement, as you'll
see.

Nirvana
-------

In the 1990s everyone was miserable. Mostly because they had to wear
ugly clothes that didn't fit, and have bad haircuts, and nobody took
showers. Plus, all the music and movies just weren't as good as they
were in the 1960s, '70s, and '80s. And nothing exciting ever happened.
Because of the miserable situation, all the bands started singing about
how miserable they all were, and nobody was more miserable than Kurt
Cobain. So of course that meant he had the most popular band of the
time. He also had a gift for writing good songs. They are one of those
bands proving once again you can learn the bare minimum of actual music,
but if you know how to twist a phrase in a catchy way, and set it to a
good simple hook of music, people will worship the ground you walk on
like a conquering king of old. And the worship their king the people
did, and they called their kingdom Grunge. Of course that didn't stop
Kurt Cobain from killing himself. Most of Nirvana's songs were pretty
noisy, but this song, **All Apologies**, probably captures what it felt
like to live in the 1990s more than any other song written.

Wu-Tang Clan
------------

In the 1990s popular rock music was getting boring. Everything kind of
sounded the same, nobody was doing anything new. At the same time,
popular hip-hop was just launching a period which would eventually
change the arc of music history affecting people right up until today.
In the 1960s folk music changed everything. In the 2000s hip-hop changed
everything. But before that happened, in the early 1990s, there was a
battle going on in hip-hop between the East Coast (which mostly means
NYC) and the West Coast (which mostly means Los Angeles). In 1993 the
West Coast was winning. Their hip-hop was was serious and dark. Nothing
the East Coast made could stand up to it. Until some dudes in NYC did
what NYC always does---they got smart. Enter the Wu-Tang Clan. The
hip-hop band that eventually became Staten Island's greatest cultural
export. They put out an album in 1994 called *Enter the Wu-Tang (36
Chambers)* which changed the way hip-hop worked. Wu-Tang is yet another
group with the great idea of cramming as many super-talented people on
stage as they could fit. Each member would take turns rapping a verse,
and the verses were just as serious and dark as the Los Angeles stuff,
but also incredibly intelligent, tricky, loaded with double meaning, and
somehow funny at the same time. Wu-Tang combined darkness with
intelligence in a way that just wiped the slate of West Coast versus
East Coast rap clean. It all started anew. Every guy in Wu-Tang would go
on to record their own albums as side-project, and every one of those
albums would spawn a whole new sub-style of hip-hop. Wu-Tang was like
some kind of amazing chain reaction in the world of music. It just kept
on going and going, changing everything it touched. Sort of the exact
opposite of the way popular rock was managing to completely not
influence anyone at all in the 1990s. This song **Protect Ya Neck** is
the track that started it all.

Nick Cave
---------

When Nick Cave was a kid, he liked to listen to Blind Willie Johnson,
and Serge Gainsbourg, and Johnny Cash. But he *loved* Leonard Cohen. He
wanted to *be* Leonard Cohen. Except he also wanted to do a lot of
Heroin and sing loud songs. So that's what he did. For decades he was a
crazy person. He had a gang of filthy brutes with thick Australian
accents nobody could understand (and one German dude) and they wouldn't
play their instruments so much as beat the crap out of them. But when
you *could* understand what Nick was singing, your found astonishing and
beautiful dark lyrics which were scary, disturbing, gross, and romantic
all at the same time. And oddly enough most of them were about God.
Sometime in the 1990s he stopped doing Heroin and his style mellowed out
a lot, and suddenly (since you could now understand what he was singing)
everyone loved Nick Cave and his amazing lyrics. This song **I Let Love
In** is from before that happened, but if you pay attention to the
lyrics you can see why people like him so much. There's only a handful
of people in the history of music, maybe even entire the history of
humanity, who can make a whole career of putting words to music in a way
that makes the music transcend the words, and the words transcend the
music at the same time---and the sum ends up greater than any of the
parts. (Most of them are somewhere on this list.) But Nick Cave is my
favorite of them all.

Will Oldham
-----------

Will Oldham, also sometimes known as Bonnie 'Prince' Billie, is one more
guy worth knowing about with an uncanny knack for turning out songs
which make your insides squishy. Sometime his lyrics are dark. Sometimes
they are beautiful. But he can take a plain-seeming phrase and stick it
to a bit of music, and somehow it just bends into spine-tingly
awesomeness. Kind of like if Dolly Parton were a grumpy guy with a big
beard who sometimes sang about frightening things. He has made lots and
lots of recordings and they aren't all amazing. (Largely because he
likes playing music a lot, so maybe he doesn't always work as hard on
the lyrics as he could.) But he has written at least a dozen world-class
songs---as good as anything ever written. This one, **I See A
Darkness**, was so good that Johnny Cash himself did a version of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Since I originally wrote this list, I have realized that there were a
few key entries that got left off. Most notably Prince and Queen. "But"
you say, "what about Bob Dylan and David Bowie, surely they should be
included, you even mention them a couple of times!" They are not
included for the simple reason that Emma was already familiar with them.
And I have to draw the line somewhere. Maybe someday I will expand this
list, or make a part 2.*
