---
layout: post
title: Why You Should (Not) Publish Your Book Under a Creative Commons License
category: publishing
goat_counter: "bysoundalone" 
---


Here in the year 2024, given the state of Creative Commons, you probably should _not_ publish your fiction work under a Creative Commons license. I can't even tell you how much this statement makes my soul ache. In the grand scheme of things, the impotency of Creative Commons is probably just one small part of the [enshittification of everything](https://www.ft.com/content/6fb1602d-a08b-4a8c-bac0-047b7d64aba5). But as someone who spent their entire adult life both utilizing open-source software and deeply committed to the principles behind free-as-in-speech licenses, I am left with nothing but a sense of complete defeat by the worst impulses of capitalism when I accepted that Creative Commons time may be passing/have passed.

I released [my novel](https://dopecentury.net) under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license. That is to say: the book is both free to download _and_ you are free to share your copy with whomever you like as many times as you like. Creative Commons isn't the only license out there that does this, but it's the most well-known one. For the sake of clarity, we'll call the whole group that includes open-source and Creative Commons "open licenses". There were two big impulses behind my decision to release my book under an open license:

	1. My whole computing life, my entire career, indeed the everything about making the book itself has relied on open-source software. I'm not much of a programmer, so while I use open-source software everyday, I haven't contributed much (other than boring ol' money) to open-source works. I put a lot of work and resources into my novel: years of re-writing and editing, illustrating diagrams, designing the cover, paying a professional to copy-edit it. It was one of the bigger efforts of my lifetime. But I was burdened with this sense of all the benefit I have received over the years from the work of people who built all this open-source software I use. I had the sense that, if I have put all this work into something, I should give back too. I should make my book free-as-in-speech.

	2. I do not care about making money. What I care about is getting as many people as possible to read my novel. Therefore, if it is free-as-in-beer, more people will read it, right?

Maybe you feel one or both of these impulses yourself. I'm glad you do, that means there's some hope that someday we won't be in the mess we are in right now. (Specifically the publishing/copyright mess, as opposed to all the other messes.) 

There was a time, ten or fifteen years ago, when Creative Commons was in its ascendancy. Creative Commons licenses had some of the magic of open-source software license bestowed on them. Special tags would show up in search engines for work released under a CC license. People were making the argument that releasing your work under an open license was good for the culture, good for your career, good for your soul, and heck, even good for [your bottom line](https://creativecommons.org/2009/03/30/advice-for-authors-on-negotiating-with-a-publisher-about-cc-licenses/). And I think you can still make this argument for certain types of content: nonfiction technical books and illustrations seem to still be benefiting their creators under open licenses.

But when it comes to fiction, the only upside remaining might be "good for your soul." And you know what? For most folks that's probably not good enough.

There's two huge drawbacks to publishing fiction under an open license. (And you'll notice neither of these is "losing money" --- I actually don't think the open license is actually at the heart of why you're not going to make any money writing a fiction book.):

	1. The traditional book publishing industry will not touch an open content book. (None of these generalizations apply if you're already super-famous --- I'm going to assume if you are reading this, you are not, which is probably a safe assumption.) If it's got a Creative Commons license attached, publishers will keep walking no matter how good your book might be. This is for the obvious reason that they don't want to try to sell something that a reader can just download for free elsewhere. Publishing is fundamentally a capitalist enterprise --- they gotta sell books. The smaller the press is, the more niche the books they publish are, the _more_ important it is that they _sell_ books. And that's fine, really. The problem isn't that. The problem is that publishers have somehow also become the gatekeepers for what a "good" book is. So if you don't have a publisher behind you, the whole book _world_ is (largely) cut off from you because of the assumption that your book isn't good because it hasn't been vetted by a publisher. So reviewers won't review your book, platforms won't host your books, promoters won't promote your book,. shops won't sell your book, and, most distressingly, readers won't read your book.

	2. _Readers won't read your book_. There's a heuristic in our culture: free book = bad book. I don't know why this is. Nobody thinks free music or movies or magazine articles are necessarily bad. But with books its different. There's an assumption that if your book is free, it must be because no publisher wants to publish it because it's bad. This applies _regardless_ of the quality of your book. I mean, not _no_ readers at all, there's a small number of people who _only_ want to read free books, bless 'em. But there's something like 20 million books you could read. You need to sort them somehow. One of the key sorting mechanisms is: is it a _real_ book? Or is it "self-published?"

This second point kills me. And I'm guilty of it myself! A big part of the problem is that there are lots and _lots_ of _awful_ free-as-in-beer books. Gotta sort 'em somehow. I guess my initial impulse to release under a Creative Commons license depended on that sense that open licenses were still special somehow. That, sure, my free book is out there in the swarm with the other free books, but maybe some folks would realize that my book is under the smaller subset of free books that is free-as-in-speech. Maybe it's worth a second glance because you have the right to not just read it for free, but distribute it yourself. To modify it even, if you like. I had this hope that somewhere on the internet remained some crew that was aggregating the open-license content of the world, and helping others to find it. Sadly, it seems like this aspect of the internet has died away. It's still true for open-source software: many people, like me, use open-source as a heuristic for _choosing_ software --- if it's open-source I'll try that first before commercial or free-sample competitor. But when it comes to fiction, this distinction seems lost. Most readers of the world see no difference between an open license book and one that is just a free sample.

What can we do about this? I don't know! It's certainly not the world I want to live in. And what's so painful is that we were much _closer_ to that world a decade ago. We're regressing when it comes to open licenses. I'd like to see outlets that focus their attention on fiction works released under open licenses: aggregators, reviewers, and awards. I'd like to see Google bring back tags that highlight books released under open licenses. I'd like to see more of those drop-down license selectors that let you choose open-content licenses as an option --- particularly for places you might be uploading a work of fiction. More than anything, I'd like to see a return to the recognition that open-license content is something a little more special than just being a free sample.





