my-harpers-letter.txt
Last modified: Mon Jan 28, 2019  05:22PM

The original article:
https://harpers.org/archive/2018/07/the-death-of-new-york-city-gentrification/

The published version of my letter:
https://harpers.org/archive/2018/09/letters-september-2018/


The actual letter:
(Aslo in other efforts)

Kevin Baker's July 2018 article about NYC is a lovely catalog of the
symptoms of the disease affecting NYC today. But like many other people,
he reduces a complex set of capitalist forces down to the individual
problem of real estate; and offers only tinkering with public policy as
a solution.

The disease is not a disease of NYC alone - it affects all our global
cities. And it is not caused by the value of real estate alone, it is
combined with the forces of inequitable economic development, free
trade, deregulation, unrepresentative democracies that over-empower
rural areas, and just the fad that it's cool to live in cities these
days, among a host of other issues. And while the causes of NYC's
disease are complex, they are not unprecedented in history (except
perhaps for the sheer scale).

What history teaches us is that policy tinkering generally yields
marginal results (not that we shouldn't tinker, we definitely should).
But history also teaches us that the teetering and fragile (and
mind-numbingly dull) monstrosities that capitalism creates will
eventually collapse back on themselves - and it is at that moment that
we should seize the opportunity to apply forces of regulation and
restraint. It is possible that this empty warehousing of units that even
the mega-wealthy are unable to afford is one of the first signs that a
collapse like this will be upon us soon. We must be ready for action.





